Hiring guidelines revamp (#39)
Vizzuality/playbook: guidelines/hiring.md

[Betabeers](https://betabeers.com/post/): Promotes job openings for devs, in Spain only, 50 € per announcement
Add more here

### For designers
[Domestika](https://www.domestika.org/en/jobs): Mainly design/UX related jobs in Spain. Free.

### For data scientists

### Others?

## Selection process
Once the post is live, collaborators will receive email updates about new candidates, comments or status changes.

### Coordinator
A coordinator will be selected (usually this role is occupied by the creator of the advert). The coordinator role will have the responsibility of assigning new candidates to each of the process' collaborators. This can be done in a first come, first served basis.

### Collaborator
When collaborators are assigned to a new candidate, they have the objective of getting the candidates through the hiring pipeline as soon as possible: either hiring the candidates or rejecting them.

> <!--- I think we should give access to the candidates to more people, and not just the collaborators. This can allow a collaborator to reach out to a person who hasn't volunteered and ask/assign that person to help out in one of the steps.

Reviewer: I think that given the way Bamboo works there should always be the demand to add someone new, instead of adding everyone from the start. But I think that adding some words about people being able to involve others is a good idea!

Reviewer 2: I'd propose that once an ad is published, we can mention that in #general, then, those who want to participate raise the hand to be added as collaborators and once you are a collaborator, you are committed to actively participate and instead of waiting for someone else to assign a candidate, pick up the one you'd like to follow the process.

Author: That was discussed as a possibility on the retrospective. We came up with the _"coordinator"_ figure because last time only a couple of people were actively checking new members. I don't mind if we wish to make it more proactive and remove the coordinator, but I'm not so sure it will work out.

The idea of the coordinator is to have someone **watching the watchmen**. To make sure the process doesn't go stale. What do you think?

Reviewer 3: I'm in favour of the coordinator.

Once the challenge solution is received, the assigned collaborator should find participants to do a round of discussion around it, evaluate it and ask for clarifications if needed.

Candidates can then be discarded, put on hold or be moved to the next step in the process by consent. In all cases candidates should be contacted and informed.

#### Interview
Sucessful candidates are set for an interview. Interviews, when possible, should be conducted in person. If it’s hard to make it in person then we should make sure we have a proper set-up with cameras, a quiet environment and a good microphone. We should also set aside enough time for preparing and conducting the interview.

##### Interview participants

Ideally there should be between two and three people performing the interview. The interviewers should include someone in a similar role with equal or higher seniority. It's preferable to have as much diversity among the interviewers (role, gender, seniority) as possible.

##### Preparing the interview

> In the preparation we will try to converge on the most important topics to talk about and the things we want to learn/clarify. By this stage, we should know more or less about the skills and experience of the participant; the main focus should be on clarifying and cementing what we know. **A key thing to keep in mind at this stage is cultural fit: we want people that want to stay at Vizzuality because they like who we are and what we do.**

Author: I agree. In reality, we've been asking technical questions all through the process. At the phone screening, on the challenge, and at the interview. I will rephrase my words. I meant to say that if we've been asking technical questions to the point where he's at the interview, it might not be the priority to focus on that.

But probably depends a lot on what the candidate has been asked throughout the process, so I'll update it.

> In the preparation we will try to converge on the most important topics to talk about and the things we want to learn/clarify. By this stage, we should know more or less about the skills and experience of the participant; the main focus should be on clarifying and cementing what we know. **A key thing to keep in mind at this stage is cultural fit: we want people that want to stay at Vizzuality because they like who we are and what we do.**

Reviewer 3: 👍

### Others?

## Selection Process
Once the post is live, collaborators will receive email updates about new candidates, coments or status changes.

### Point-person

> A point-person will be selected (usually this role is occupied by the of the advert). The point-person role will have the responsibility of assigning new candidates to each of the process' collaborators. This can be done in a first came, first served basis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A point-of-contact will be selected (usually this role is done by the creator of the advert). The point-of-contact role will have the responsibility of assigning new candidates to each of the process' collaborators. This can be done in a first come, first served basis.
```

Author: I think point of contact implies that that person is the one who contacts the candidates, which is not the case.

Reviewer: Yeah you're right. But "Point-person" sounds weird, is it more like the "hiring liaison" for a given position? Or coordinator?

### Collaborator

> When a collaborator is assigned to a new candidate, he has the objective of getting the candidate through the hiring pipeline as soon as possible; either hiring the candidate or rejecting him.

Reviewer 4: >he has the objective

I think you should replace "he" by "he or she" or "they".

<!--- I think we should give access to the candidates to more people, and not just the collaborators. This can allow a collaborator to reach out to a person who hasn't volunteered and ask/assign that person to help out in one of the steps.
THOUGHTS ??
--->

> The collaborator doesn't have the responsability to perform any of the steps in the hiring pipeline by himself. His main responsability is to find people in the company that can participate in the necessary steps.

Reviewer 4: Same here: I would replace "himself" by "themselves" and "his" by "their".

### Steps

> > While it's very important to have empathy for the candidates throughtout the process; we mustn't forget that moving a candidate forward is time consuming and has a cost, both for the company, and the candidate. Therefore it's vital to reject candidates as soon in the process as possible.

Reviewer 4: Typo: "throughtout" should be "throughout".

> > While it's very important to have empathy for the candidates throughtout the process; we mustn't forget that moving a candidate forward is time consuming and has a cost, both for the company, and the candidate. Therefore it's vital to reject candidates as soon in the process as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> While it's very important to have empathy for the candidates throughtout the process; we mustn't forget that moving a candidate forward is time consuming and has a cost, both for the company, and the candidate. Therefore it's vital to reject candidates as early in the process as possible if they are not a fit.
```

#### First filter
A first screening can be done at this point where any of the participants can suggest to discard a candidate as “not a fit”, “not qualified” or “over qualified”. The decision to discard a candidate should be made by consent, meaning if there’s no principled objections the candidate can be discarded.

#### Review

> Candidates who pass the first filter can either be marked as “reviewed” or “put on hold”. The choice is basically about priority. A candidate shouldn't be placed on hold for more that a reasonable amount of time (2 - 3 weeks), once that time has past the candidate should be contacted to advance in the process or to be notified about rejection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Candidates who pass the first filter can either be marked as “reviewed” or “put on hold”. The choice is basically about priority. A candidate shouldn't be placed on hold for more that a reasonable amount of time (2 - 3 weeks), once that time has passed the candidate should be contacted to advance in the process or to be notified about rejection.
```

> If the candidate looks promissing but there’s more info needed (code samples, certifications, visa status, motivations, etc) then collaborators can send an email through the system requesting it (there are available templates on BambooHR for this) and change the status to “Requested more info". If a candidate doesn't reply to the request for more info after a reasonable amount of time (2 weeks), the candidate should be dismissed.

Reviewer 4: Other typo: "promissing" should be "promising".

Once a satisfactory response has been received applicant can be discarded, moved to “reviewed”, or “put on hold”.

#### Phone screen
Once a candidate is set as “reviewed”, the responsible collaborator has the responsibility of finding the appropriate people inside the company to participate in the call; collaborator should also email the candidate, and change status to “Scheduled Phone Screen”.

> This phone screen is a short introductory call where we try to solve doubts and get a better sense of the candidate and their fit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This phone screen is a short introductory call where we try to solve doubts and get a better sense of the candidate and how they fit with the role.
```

> Ideally phone screen should be prerformed by at least two people, one of which should be in a functional role that is similar to the open position. There should be a brief preparation beforehand where the participants identify the things they want to find out and share with the participant.

Reviewer 4: "prerformed" 😬

> It's very important to remember that a phone screening isn't an interview. Therefore it should to the point, covering only things partipants want to learn about or share with the candidate.

Reviewer 4: >it should to the point

It should _go_ to the point?

> [TBD] Ideally ~at least a part of~ the phone screening should be counducted in English.

Reviewer 4: Typo: "counducted" should be "conducted".

We have a template (WIP) with possible questions for these calls. In general they should be open and focus on the competencies, skills and cultural fit of the candidate.

Apart from other specific issues (such as availability, english language, etc) we should focus on the candidate’s motivation and offer to solve any doubts they may have about the position or the company.

Outcomes of the call should be documented in the “comments” section on BambooHR candidate's page. Candidate will then be moved to "Phone screened" or discarded and informed accordingly.

#### Challenge

> Some times we may request a skill challenge to the candidates. Challenges are normally requested to candidates whose provided portafolio isn't enough to determine their skills. Specific roles may have pre-created Challenges (e.g. [Front end coding chalenge](https://github.com/Vizzuality/coding-challenge-examples) ---> [TBD] create challenges for other roles?)

Reviewer 4: I think "Some times" should be written "Sometimes".

The assigned collaborator should explain clearly what we expect from the challenge, how much effort we think the candidate should put on it, the general rules and what we will be trying to learn from it. The challenge will have a reasonable time limit (1 week), that depending on the motive can be extended if necessary.

Once the challenge solution is received, the assigned collaborator should find participants to do a round of discussion around it, evaluate it and ask for clarifications if needed.

Candidates can then be discarded, put on hold or moved to the next step in the process by consent. In all cases candidates should be contacted and informed.

#### Interview
Sucessful candidates are set for an interview. Interviews, when possible, should be conducted in person. If it’s hard to make it in person then we should make sure we have a proper set-up with cameras, a quiet environment and a good microphone. We should also set aside enough time for preparing and conducting the interview.

##### Interview participants

> Ideally there should be between two and three people performing the interview. The interviewers should occupy a role with equal or higher seniority. It's preferable to have as much diversity among the interviewer (role, gender, seniority) as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ideally there should be between two and three people performing the interview. The interviewers should include someone in a similar role with equal or higher seniority. It's preferable to have as much diversity among the interviewer (role, gender, seniority) as possible.
```

##### Preparing the interview

> In the preparation we will try to converge on the most important topics to talk about and the things we want to learn/clarify. By this stage, we should know more less about the skills and experience of the participant; the main focus should be on clarifying and cementing what we know. A key thing to keep in mind at this stage is cultural fitness: we want people that want to stay at Vizzuality because they like who we are and what we do.

Reviewer 4: I think "we should know more less" should be "we should know more or less" (the "or" is missing).

Reviewer 4: I also think "cultural fitness" sounds weird. Isn't it "cultural fit"? Maybe a native English speaker could clarify.

> In the preparation we will try to converge on the most important topics to talk about and the things we want to learn/clarify. By this stage, we should know more less about the skills and experience of the participant; the main focus should be on clarifying and cementing what we know. A key thing to keep in mind at this stage is cultural fitness: we want people that want to stay at Vizzuality because they like who we are and what we do.

Reviewer 2: What about to create a check-list of things we need to know after the interview?
There is that excel file but looks quite intense to me. 
What I have on mind is something like: 
- Skills level
- Cultural fit
- Warns
- ...

Author: I like the idea of a checklist.

About the excel file, yes I agree I mention it in the next paragraph as a thing to take inspiration from but not necessarily a thing to follow.

I really liked what @davidsingal @aagm @martindub prepared for the last interview, I tried mentioning that in the guidelines. Maybe they can add it to this document in a more detailed way.

Reviewer 5: We did prepare a quick list with some possible questions for this one interview we had: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VhTToxigpraZnK55vocRdlkfrXwfxLpFPAzdBeknbyU/edit?usp=sharing
The doc is a bit rough, but we kind of built it by going back and forth between interview questions we felt could be relevant, and by trying to think at which personality or work attitude traits we were interested in exploring. 
(though to be fair I think there is a more comprehensive doc out there with more questions, can't rmb where it is though)

Author: I think we can add the checklist once we have created it. Until then I think we should merge this.

> Once the participants have converged on what they want to take out of the interview, they should write them down is a small list of things to ask/evaluate. (This script can be inspired in the existing template, but should be adapted to what we need to learn and who are we interviewing. The existing template is quite thorough, we probably don't need to cover all of it, and should be used as a guideline only).

Reviewer 4: > they should write them down is a small list of things to ask/evaluate

Something's wrong in that sentence (around "is").

Reviewer 4: > This script can be inspired in the existing template

I'm pretty sure "inspired in" isn't correct. Maybe you could put "based on".

Author: I'm not sure if it should be based on the template, that implies that you will copy part of it which is not mandatory.
